---
Link: https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2023/04/230417155750.htm
Research URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167268119302586
Type: Article
---
## Introduction

Individuals exhibit persistence in many types of decisions including brand of consumer package goods, health insurance, and employment decisions; even when such decisions appear inconsistent with rational forward-looking behavior (Keane, 1997, Dube, Hirsch, Rossi, 2010, Handel, 2013).1 When individuals persist in making consumption decisions that lead to adverse long-run health outcomes, (e.g., smoking, drinking, etc.) economists frequently appeal to habit formation or rational addiction models for an explanation (Ryder, Heal, 1973, Becker, Murphy, 1988, Constantinides, 1990).2,3 However, individuals also exhibit persistence in unhealthy choices in some areas for which “addiction” is an unlikely explanation. For example, individuals may choose to abstain from a particular good or activity, such as eating fruits and vegetables or exercising. For these types of decisions, the behavioral economics literature posits that status-quo bias or “inertia” may explain why it is difficult to get individuals to change their behavior (Samuelson, Zeckhauser, 1988, Kahneman, Knetsch, Thaler, 1991, Thaler, Sunstein, 2003). The main claim in the inertia literature is that individuals keep repeating the same choices simply by reverting to a default state, rather than because of addiction or switching costs.

Habit-in-utility and inertia (or default bias) are not mutually exclusive explanations for persistence in individuals choices. The combination of these factors can present serious challenges when designing interventions to get individuals to change behaviors. Consider the case of individuals persistently choosing not to exercise and earning the label ‘sedentary.’ Sedentary lifestyles have become increasingly common among U.S. adults. As a result of this and other factors, obesity and obesity-related diseases such as heart disease, type 2 diabetes, and hypertension have become more prevalent (Flegal, Carroll, Ogden, Curtin, 2010, Ogden, Carroll, Kit, Flegal, 2014). Employers, researchers, and policy makers continue to seek ways to encourage physical activity and avoid adverse health outcomes. For an intervention to be cost effective, however, it must lead to behavioral changes that persist after the intervention concludes.

Both the concepts of habit-in-utility and inertia are useful in considering how to affect persistent change in individuals’ patterns of physical activity. First, individuals may have status-quo bias or inertia towards being physically inactive in the absence (or after the conclusion) of some intervention. If being sedentary is a default option, individuals will tend to revert to that state. If we are designing an intervention, it may be useful to know how greater frequency of exercise during an intervention erodes the tendency to revert to the default state. Second, for an intervention to affect persistent change, participants will need to build some ‘stock of habituation’ in physical activity. The notion of ‘getting in shape’ implies that physical activity today affects the marginal (dis)utility of physical activity in subsequent periods, akin to ‘tolerance’ in the rational addiction literature. Engaging in physical activity with greater frequency, or engaging in regular physical activity over a longer period of time should increase that stock.

In this paper, we employ a novel data set from a manufacturer of stationary exercise equipment to empirically investigate how individuals’ frequency of usage during an initial period affects their exercise decisions in subsequent periods. Equipment users can download a mobile application (app) that pairs their mobile phones to the company’s fitness machines, enabling users to track their workouts over time. Our data set contains all app-tracked workouts on this company’s equipment from January 1, 2011 to July 31, 2015, meaning we have multiple years of daily reported workout activity for some users. We investigate the relationship between the frequency with which individuals exercise during an initial period (and the length of that initial period) and the individual’s exercise behavior over the ensuing months in two respects. First, we examine whether more frequent workouts during an initial period lead to a higher volume of workouts over the next three to six months. Second, we examine whether the frequency of exercise during the initial period affects the probability that an individual continues to exercise regularly thereafter.

By understanding the relationship between intervention duration, frequency of activity, and subsequent persistence, we hope our findings can provide insight on the length of an intervention period and frequency of activity needed to erode inertia and form new habits. We consider three durations of ‘initial period’: two, four, and six weeks. For each defined period, we estimate a two-stage duration model to analyze how the number of days that an individual exercised in the initial period impacts their likelihood of continuing to exercise regularly. For example, we can use this model to estimate how exercising 10 vs 15 days in a given initial period (e.g., 4 weeks) affects the probability that an individual continues to exercise with a certain regularity. We also use the estimates from our model to make comparisons between initial periods of varying length. For example, if an individual exercised 16 times over a four week initial period, how many times would he need to exercise during a six week initial period in order to maintain the same predicted level of persistence in exercise behavior going forward? In addition, we estimate a linear 2SLS model to examine how the number of workouts during the initial period affects the number of recorded workouts over the next three and six months.

There are several reasons to suspect there is correlation in the unobservables that determine both the frequency of exercise within an initial period and the propensity to exercise in subsequent periods (e.g., preferences for physical activity, perseverance, unobserved patterns of exercise prior to registering for the application, etc.). For our identification strategy, we merge data on the county in which the individual is located with daily weather data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Following Fujiwara et al. (2016), we use the number of days during the initial period in which more than half an inch of precipitation fell as an instrument for the number of workouts.4 To alleviate concerns about serial correlation in weather patterns, we control for contemporaneous rainfall in the second stage of our main analysis, and also include state and month fixed effects.5 In our first-stage results, we find that more rainy days during the initial period decreases the number of days that individuals engage in stationary exercise during that period. While this may initially be counterintuitive, a majority of the individuals in our data are exercising at health clubs. On rainy days, individuals are more inclined to go directly home after work and stay there. For example, Connolly (2008) finds that on rainy days, men work an additional 30 min on average and salaried workers watch an additional 16 min of television. To the extent that weather induces individuals to allocate their time differently, weather will affect the amount of time available for stationary exercise.6

Our identification strategy also helps us address a limiting feature of our data. Specifically, in order to observe an individual exercising, the individual must make all four of the following choices: 1) to exercise, 2) to exercise on stationary exercise equipment, 3) to exercise on our manufacturers brand of stationary equipment, and 4) to track it using the app. If we do not observe an individual exercising during a given period, we do not know which of these four conditions were not met. Therefore, we cannot discern exercising outside or on a competitor’s equipment from inactivity. However, our use of weather as an instrument eliminates some concerns about how to interpret a non-observation. Specifically, while weather may affect an individual’s propensity to exercise (choice 1), or to use stationary equipment conditional on exercising (choice 2), there is no reason to suggest that conditional on choices 1 and 2, that weather affects users choice of equipment brand (choice 3) or use of the app (choice 4). Therefore, for weather to affect the number of workouts during an initial period, it must be through the extensive margin on whether or not to exercise, or to use stationary equipment. Because our first-stage results imply that precipitation decreases the number of days that individuals engage in exercise, this suggests that weather primarily affects exercise through the first margin (whether or not to exercise at all). However, to the extent that these results are affected by substitution on other margins, they should be interpreted more cautiously (i.e., frequency of stationary exercise during the initial period predicts greater persistence in stationary exercise, rather than physical activity in general).

We find that both the length of the initial period and the frequency with which an individual exercises during the initial period strongly affects both the amount of expected future exercise and the probability of continuing to exercise consistently in subsequent periods. While certain aspects of the data make it infeasible to specifically identify parameters in the individual’s utility function, these results are consistent with the hypothesis that increased frequency of exercise during the initial period leads to more rapid habit formation. First, results from the 2SLS model indicate that exercising with greater frequency during an initial period leads to more activity during the ensuing three to six months. If we consider an initial period of four weeks, results indicate that one more workout per week during the initial period (i.e., exercising four more times over the four-week initial period) leads to an additional 5.2 (12.4) workouts during the subsequent three (six) months. The magnitude of the estimated marginal effects is not terribly sensitive to the definition of the length of initial period. If we similarly consider an initial period of six weeks, one more workout per week during the initial period leads to an additional 4.3 (12.9) workouts during the subsequent three (six) months.

In addition to increasing the total number of observed workouts, greater frequency of exercise during the initial period also leads individuals to exercise more consistently. For any given length of the initial period, individuals who exercise four times per week during the initial period are nearly 3.5 times more likely to exercise weekly over the next eight weeks than individuals who exercised three times a week over the same initial period.7 Conditional on exercise frequency, the length of the initial period also matters. Individuals who exercised an average of four times per week over the first six weeks were 40.5% more likely to exercise each of the next eight weeks than individuals who exercised four times per week over the first four weeks, and over 80% more likely than those who exercised four times per week over the first two weeks. However, the stylized facts of our data are consistent with a strong default bias towards inactivity. Greater frequency of activity only partially offsets individuals’ tendency to stop exercising.

Our results are consistent with findings from recent studies using field experimental approaches, but offer new insight for future incentive-based interventions. Several recent studies have utilized field experiments to examine whether incentives can motivate physical activity through gym attendance (Charness, Gneezy, 2009, Cawley, Price, 2013, DellaVigna, Malmendier, 2006, Acland, Levy, 2015, Royer, Stehr, Sydnor, 2015). This literature has generally found that financial incentives can successfully induce a strong positive response (i.e. greater gym attendance), but evidence on the long-run persistence of these behavioral changes is mixed (Gneezy et al., 2011). For example, Acland and Levy (2015) found that financial incentives positively impact gym attendance among university students, but these effects decay considerably once the students leave for winter break. While Royer et al. (2015) found some evidence to suggest that financial incentives combined with commitment contracts can induce some longer-lasting behavioral changes, the overall persistence of any incentive-induced behavioral changes was still relatively weak.

From a policy perspective, both the response to incentives and the persistence of any incentive-induced behavioral changes are of nearly equal importance. Our results indicate that the lack of persistence in Charness and Gneezy (2009), Acland and Levy (2015), and Royer et al. (2015) could be improved if subjects are required to exercise at a sufficiently high frequency (or sufficiently long intervention period) to break the status-quo bias for inactivity or form a new habit. Our model and empirics reproduce this lack of persistence found in earlier work, and suggests that interventions that require greater exercise frequency may lead to habit formation and affect persistent change. For example, Charness and Gneezy (2009) and Acland and Levy (2015) offer incentives for individuals to exercise up to eight times over a one-month period while in Royer et al. (2015) the participants are provided with incentives to exercise up to 12 times over the one-month period. In all three cases, the researchers observed increased gym attendance for those who participate in the intervention program, but these effects quickly decay. Our results support this pattern. Our model predicts that individuals who only exercised eight times during the first month have less than a 0.6% probability of exercising every week for the next eight weeks. Similarly, individuals who exercise only 12 times over the first month have a 4.7% probability of exercising each of the next eight weeks. By contrast, an individual who exercises 16 times during the first month has a 16.5% probability of exercising in each of the next eight weeks. While requiring individuals to exercise more frequently may lead to higher attrition rates, our results indicate that interventions requiring greater frequency of activity may generate more persistent behavioral change.