Sora has 70% of its users creating content vs the average 10% obviously these numbers won’t hold, but it begs what are people doing them that’s getting them so active? The answer, anything they want. And in the long-term that’s the ideal for AI generation. Users shouldn’t have any barriers to creating exactly what they’re looking for because, presumably, that’s what they want to create most. And if they’re achieving that then they’re more likely to stick with the app.

The Diverging Paths of Sora
1. The Slop Problem - The easier it is to create and the more people expressing themselves this way the more low effort content gets created and spread over the internet. There’s a subcategory of problems here too, it’s not really slop anymore. We’re likely in, or close to, a post-slop society. Generative AI has hit a point where it’s getting incredibly difficult to distinguish what’s real or not. 
2. Quality Collapse - If everyone creates the impact of individual creations is far less impactful. If we think back a few months to the Ghiblification of everything, the novelty of each creation quickly ran towards zero. I was wishing that I could block styles of images after the first few days. We’re likely to see the same with varieties of content created on Sora and other video generators. Infinite creation does not equate to infinite creativity.
3. Endless Personal Consumption - What we likely see is that Sora becomes integrated with a companion app. This is similar to the approach Musk is taking with Grok and their companion app. 
4. Unsustainable - Cost of Sora is incredible. No matter how many eyeballs they get on it now and how many ads they shove down everyone’s throat it would be impossible to recoup costs. Does this mean OpenAI starts to limit who gets access? Will number of generations be hard-capped until you've proven you can generate clicks. 
5. The collapse of virality - If everyone can create and their are presumably a maximum number of interesting variations of a meme, we are likely to hit that maximum far faster in an AI generated future. Two possible outcomes here. One is that we all would stop caring. If there's no point in creating because memes die to fast we'll likely focus on in-group jokes rather than virality. The second is curation of memes. Individuals, likely streamers, will dictate what becomes viral rather than a cultural uplift from social media. 
6. Communication not artifact - 
There is a hopeful sliver whete everyone harnesses their creative prowess for expression and communication, but I find this unlikely. It's already dreadfully easy to create content with almost no personal drawbacks. Audio, video, the written word, the arts. None of these things are inaccessible. And no matter what Altman might argue, creativity still requires a decent prompt.

Jake Paul doing his make-up is a singular, one-time novel concept. Creating 10,000 variations of this is not creativity or expression. It's validation seeking. 